>> Is there a hidden,
more esoteric,
deeper meaning to the Hollywood
films that we all love
to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weidner.
And this is Hollywood Decoded.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "The Matrix" is
a very esoteric,
philosophically heavy
trilogy from the Wachowskis.
And we chose it because it deals
with these perennial themes
like Plato's "Allegory
of the Cave."
>> Yeah, like those lights
flickering on the wall.
The people that are
caught in the matrix
think that they're
actually watching reality.
>> Right.
>> But they're really not.
And that Morpheus comes in
and he shatters Neo's reality
and turns him into
what he became.
So it's a great movie.
It's about redemption
and the Gnostic ideas
that we're being controlled
by a demiurge, a false god
and we're embedded
in a false reality.
>> So in this scene we're going
to see the White Rabbit and how
it relates to the
"Simulacra and Simulation."
There's a lot of stuff
going on in this scene.
So we notice that Neo--
we didn't see it,
but he's actually
doing his hacking stuff.
And he gets an IM
from Trinity and it's
leading him to go to this
club and ultimately meet her.
But if you pay
attention, he's actually
scrolling through
news stories that deal
with this mysterious
terrorist, as he's
described in the mainstream
news, known as Morpheus.
[UNLOCKING DOOR]
>> You're two hours late.
>> I know.
It's her fault.
>> Got the money?
>> Two grand.
>> Hold on.
>> The system is describing
these people outside
of the matrix as terrorists.
And little does Neo
know that he's actually
being led towards this
very important encounter
with Trinity.
And you'll notice
that he opened up
this book that's a very
famous philosophical work.
And throughout "The
Matrix" trilogy
there's going to be several
key books that are placed
in the background for a reason.
Here, this is Jean Baudrillard's
"Simulacra and Simulation."
And that deals with
the world as synthetic.
That we've been actually
fooled and duped
into this kind of
matrix reality,
not just in the sense of the
whole world but that technology
is taking us into a real
matrix being constructed.
And this is actual stuff that
the Pentagon and DARPA deal
with, that you can
actually create
an inner link between
the brain and, you know,
the internet and so forth.
So I think this,
on so many levels,
is showing us not just
where we're going,
but reaching back into
ancient philosophy and Plato,
and modern philosophy,
postmodernism
with Baudrillard, all
kinds of stuff going on.
And if you saw, his
address was 101.
Binary code which is
what makes up the matrix.
>> The White Rabbit has many
symbols associated with mind
control in "Alice in
Wonderland" and the whole thing.
And so this is,
again, the opposite,
though, he is mind-controlled
at the beginning
and he's actually going
to get un-mindcontrolled
by the White Rabbit.
So it's kind of the opposite
of how they're usually
portraying these things.
>> Exactly.
So you're going to see a lot of
terminology that's used, too,
that's like Zion and Trinity,
but they're given new meanings,
they're given of Gnostic
meanings in this trilogy.
I don't know what
to make of this,
but, as we're going to see in
this next scene in this clip,
there's all kinds of
predictive programming in this.
One of the guys who worked
on the technical aspects
of this film is Paul Debevec.
And back in the
90s, early 90s, he
had actually perfected
his CGI to where
you couldn't tell the difference
between reality and CGI.
He later went on to work
with DARPA in the Pentagon.
So I think that "The
Matrix" is actually,
in many ways showing us,
not just this mythology,
but, again, where
technology really could go
and how we could
actually be duped.
I mean, we can't trust
what's on mainstream media.
We don't know exactly
what's going on.
We can't just buy
the mainstream story.
And the matrix itself even
shows us that with Morpheus
being portrayed as a terrorist.
And as we're going to see
in this next scene, when
agent Smith has Neo
there being questioned,
you know, interrogated,
why do they have the date--
this is 1999-- as
September 11, 2001?
That's Neo's passport date.
>> That's right.
And just for a second,
I'd like to touch on some
of the names of the people.
Trinity is, of course, three.
And in sacred geometry
and in Hermetics
everything kind of
evolves from the three.
You know, one is a single
unit and two is duality
and then three is what
duality gives birth to.
>> The triad.
>> Which is three,
four, five, six,
seven and all the
rest of the numbers.
But they all have to start
out with these three.
And if you look at some of the
philosophies from, say, India,
they're all built around
this idea of a trinity.
That an idea within
the human brain
always has three aspects to it.
So the Indians, the
Vedic teachings,
teach it's consciousness,
time, and space are the three
aspects of this reality.
>> It's also past,
present, and future.
>> That's right.
And Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva
are also the three aspects
of this to tri-enity.
And so I think it's
kind of amazing
that the person who is the
impetus for this journey
that Neo is taking is named
Trinity and it's a woman.
Union is very
important in alchemy.
So you have the male
principle and you also
have the Sophia
principle that have
to be united for the final, you
know, final state of matter.
When matter transcends it
becomes a Philosopher's stone,
right?
So you have to have
that union first.
And that's ultimately what
we're going to see in the film.
But this passport
scene is fascinating.
I've always seen this as
one of the most amazing
instances predictive
programming.
>> You have a social security
number, you pay your taxes,
and you help your landlady
carry out her garbage.
The other life is
lived in computers
where you go by the
hacker alias Neo
and are guilty of
virtually every computer
crime we have a law for.
One of these lives has a future.
One of them does not.
I'm going to be as forthcoming
as I can be, Mr. Anderson,
you're here because
we need your help.
We know that you've
been contacted
by a certain individual, a man
who calls himself Morpheus.
Now, whatever you think you know
about this man is irrelevant.
He is considered
by many authorities
to be the most
dangerous man alive.
My colleagues believe that I
am wasting my time with you.
But I believe you wish
to do the right thing.
Now we're willing to
wipe the slate clean,
give you a fresh start.
All that we're asking in
return is your cooperation
in bringing a known
terrorist to justice.
>> Interestingly, this is
predictive programming,
I would say.
And you have to watch
it really close,
maybe you might even have
to freeze your Blu-Ray
or DVD to see that the
date is 2001, right?
9/11, 2001.
So maybe a quick excursus of
somewhat predictive programming
is.
I believe that it's this
notion of conditioning people
to what's going to come, right?
So that maybe the subconscious
sees these images and records
it and then when it actually
happens in the real world,
we're a lot more
willing to accept it.
We've been conditioned.
A lot of predictive
programming had
to prepare us for
the Panopticism
that we got with Philip K
Dick and "Minority Report"
and accepting this total
surveillance, right?
Because we've seen it
so many times in fiction
that we just feel
like it's inevitable.
Oh, yeah, I saw that 10
years ago in that movie.
I guess it's here now.
This is the way it's
got to be, right?
>> Yeah it's like putting on
a pair of old jeans, you know?
It's like, oh, I've worn
these so many times,
it conformed to my body.
Well, you see this
predictive programming
and then pretty soon, it's like,
oh, I knew this all the time.
The fact that this is
a scene where they're
talking about terrorists--
>> Exactly.
>> --And Morpheus is a terrorist
and that his passport is
the date of the biggest
terrorist event in history
cannot be an accident.
And we've seen this before in
the "Back to the Future" films.
Where there does
seem to be people
in the know trying to pass
information downstream.
And that, to me, that
passport calendar date
is actually one of
the most astonishing
predictive programing
ever in film history.
>> So, as Neo has come
out of his false reality
and he's joined his merry band
of rebels and revolutionaries,
he's going to see the
source code, right?
He's going to understand that
reality is constructed kind
of like the Cabalists
saw it as a kind
of numerical or linguistic code,
like all of reality itself.
And we've seen
this in other films
as well, like "2001" where
the fabric of reality
is these platonic solids, right?
And so in this sequence, this is
where he realizes he's the one.
>> No.
[GUNFIRE]
>> If we go back,
as we said before,
to Platonism and we think
about how reality is structured
in a certain way to have form
and that even at the smallest
level of reality,
there's a kind of code.
We think about DNA, right?
DNA is a coding sequence that
makes life forms what they are.
>> He is the one.
>> In the hermetic tradition,
a number is at the core
of reality.
>> Right.
>> It is the only thing that is
actually real because it can ca
quantified.
So everything is
number, from the number
of atoms and
molecules that we have
in our body to the number of
gut organisms we have in us.
And everything is this kind
of result of a measure.
>> Measure.
>> Yeah.
And geometry and number are
at the heart of our reality.
And at the heart of the Matrix
is this numerical system which
drives and informs everything.
Another thing I'll point
out about "The Matrix"
is if you want to know
if you're in the Matrix
or not while you're watching
the film, if the shot has
a green tint to it,
you're in the Matrix.
If the green tint is gone,
you're out of the Matrix.
There's a very
clever little thing
that the Wachowskis did to
just tint the film a little bit
and that's how you know
you're in the Matrix.
And what "The Matrix"
also is is Neo
is that guy in
Plato's Allegory who
breaks free of the
chains of the cave
and goes out to the
mouth of the cave
and actually sees
what the world--
>> Sees the sunlight.
>> Right.
Sees world as it really is.
Percy Shelley did a great
poem about all of this.
I think what's kind of
disappointing about the sequels
of "The Matrix" is that
he's been fully individuated
by the end of the film.
That's why you feel so
good by the end of the film
because you realize he has
reached his full apex of power
so there really isn't anywhere
to go with this story.
Now they did do some interesting
things in the next two films
with the Merovingian
and the architect
and how the universe is
a Masonic control system.
And I thought that
was really good.
But the real point of this
movie is the liberation
of Neo from his sleep, from
his Morpheus, the god of sleep,
who helps him rise
from the dreamworld
and face the world
as it really is.
And to come to understand
that there is a demiurge.
There is a false
god making a world
and telling us that
this is the real world.
And Neo's buddies
are saying, no.
Now this is a very Sophianic
rebellion against this.
And it should be
pointed out that there
have been many Sophianic
rebellions in our past
and all of them
have been violently
put down by the powers that be.
As if the one kind
of mythos that's
not allowed to be
spoken in public
is this whole
Gnostic mythos where
outside force of feminine
energy comes and creates
this world and
then these archons
come and try to create a
prison around that creation.
And that's what this
movie is really about.
>> Well, a matrix, we think
of the matrix of the womb
of a woman.
And so this matrix gives
birth to this figure Neo.
Neo means new, right?
So he is the new man.
And this is, again, this
is kind of Nietzschean.
Ubermensch, Nietzsche
talked about this,
Communists tried to
adopt it, Che Guevara
thought that all
of the collective
could be the new man.
>> That's right.
>> And Nietzsche proposed it
would actually be an individual
that would be the
new man, so to speak.
So he is the real avatar,
which is how they make sense
of him being fully actualized.
But how are we going
to have sequels?
Oh, well, there were all
these other Neos that came
and they failed.
But this is the Neo Neo, right?
He's the real Neo.
>> Yeah.
And, you know, I
think a lot of people
felt cheated that
they kept milking it.
I understand, it's Hollywood.
And they added enough stuff
to make it interesting.
>> Right.
They've really never
been able to recover
as filmmakers, the Wachowskis.
This is what happens when
one of your first films
is so great, so amazing that you
can never achieve this again.
[INAUDIBLE]
>> Yeah, you can't.
In the Hermetic tradition,
in sacred geometry,
there's actually
two kinds of one.
Neo is, of course,
an anagram for one.
And there's the one, which is
the totality of the universe.
And then there's
the one as a unit.
So in this film we
actually have Neo
going from one as a unit to
one as totality in which he is
the master of this world now.
And I think that that is a
beautiful double entendre
on how they're using the
word one in this movie.
And I think, again,
it's going from the many
to the single within himself.
That is what's important here.
And to show those numbers--
And also, you have
notice that everything
is going down in this film,
everything is moving downwards.
It's almost like it's
a transformer that's
taking a higher voltage--
>> But at the end
he flies, you know?
>> Finally, he's
liberated and he flies.
>> Right.
>> Right?
So after the whole
movie of everything kind
of going down, finally,
at the end of the movie,
he's liberated.
And we feel that.
We feel that when
we're watching it.
>> So binary is all
about dialectics, right?
And we've talked about
dialectical tensions
and the black and the white
and, you know, all that before.
But what is happening
in this sequence is
that the awakening
for him is, just
like in "2001" with Bowman, he's
transcending the limitations
of space and time.
So our reality is night/day,
black/white, dialectic.
We're stuck in that.
>> That duality.
>> How do we transcend that?
And that is what they're
trying to say with Neo, here,
because he can stop the bullets,
he can see the source code,
he can fly, he's like Superman.
He's Ubermensch, basically, now.
>> That's right.
And so the duality gives
birth to a single, to a what.
>> That's right.
>> And just like it takes
two parents to make a child.
And I think that's
what's going on, here.
The whole movie is about the
duality of our fake existence
under the demiurge.
And then how once
we remove ourselves
from that kind of fake reality,
we can have one as a totality.
>> Right.
It's also going
to be weird, too,
because at the end
of the film, he's
going to submit to
the master program
to defeat the architect.
Because the bots are run by a
program, the Architect, and he
allows himself to be this
sort of savior figure.
Which is interesting, because
at the end of the film,
he's basically going
to give himself,
give his life up in a kind of
sacrificial offering to trick
Agent Smith, the rebel
program, into coming into him
and being destroyed.
>> Yeah, that's very close
to the Sophianic myths where
Sophia gives up her goddess-hood
to come here to earth to make
things, you know,
solidify her creations.
And again, she
has to take in all
of the evil in order for her to
create and become more godlike.
So Neo sacrifices himself, which
is really what the Christos
myth is about self-sacrifice.
>> So I read "The Matrix" as a
retelling of Plato's "Allegory
of the Cave," straight
out of "The Republic."
it's just the simple message
of this reality being false,
there's another one out there,
and a lot of what we've been
told in perennial philosophy in
Cabbalism about how the world
is structured in this kind
of binary code, like DNA,
is true and those are the kind
of [? seekers ?] that are going
to lead us towards
transcendence.
>> It is about the--
just like Bowman in
"2001"-- it's about Neo
represents us as a human
race freeing ourselves
from the matrix of control
and being liberated as a race.
>> "Matrix Reloaded" takes up
where the last one left off
and introduces a bunch
of new mythology.
Something very curious,
the Merovingian mythos,
which is this idea of
Illuminati bloodlines out
of France connected to
Charlemagne and so forth
and is this a real
occult secret society.
The Merovingian is
going to present
vampirism and that
parasitic type of feeding
on other life forms.
>> It is, of course,
the way of all things.
You see, there is only one
constant, one universe,
it is the only real truth.
Causality, action,
reaction, cause and effect.
>> Everything
begins with choice.
>> No.
Wrong.
Choice is an illusion
created between those
with power and those without.
Look there at that woman.
My God, just look at her.
>> Here we have this enigmatic
figure of the Merovingian,
he represents this high level
blood line out of France,
right?
And what he's going to do is
try to entrap Neo, right so?
This is the next phase
of Neo's process.
And we're going to learn about
the architect here in a minute
and that the
Merovingian actually
works for the Architect.
So what is it with this
Merovingians stuff?
Why do you think they
introduced this in the film?
>> Oh, it was very curious.
A lot of people
don't even understand
what the Merovingians
were, who they were.
They were a group of kings in
France in the first 1,000 years
of existence.
There were rumors that
their name, Merovingian,
is a combination
of Mary Magdalene
and that they were the
direct result of a wedding
or a marriage between
Jesus and Mary Magdalene.
Mary Magdalene, of course,
had to escape, go to France
while she was pregnant.
And there is even a church
in the south of France
dedicated to Mary Magdalene
with a big boat on the altar
and Mary Magdalene
and her two assistants
and she's very much pregnant.
And whether it's true
or not, I don't know.
But there are a group
of people in France
who seriously believe this
beyond any shadow of a doubt.
>> The British nobility, the
British crown also traces its--
they believe that they
are decendents from Jesus.
>> They do.
>> That they're
related to King David.
So this may sound
far-fetched, but this
is the actual mythology
of European nobility.
They think they have this
divine bloodline, basically.
>> They do.
And we'll get into that when we
talk about "The Da Vinci Code"
because it's going to
be very interesting.
But the Merovingians
were a magical people
who could affect people
with their magic.
They had tremendous charisma
and had really long hair
and they got their power
from their hair, they said.
Which is very interesting.
>> Well so, this
character, interestingly,
what he's proposing is that
it's all determined, right?
And he does this
cause/effect relationship
with this woman who's at
his restaurant, right?
>> Right.
>> And he's trying to
demonstrate to Neo's band
of revolutionaries that
there is no free will.
It is all literally a computer
program that we live in,
a simulation.
And therefore, if that's
true, there is no free will.
And what does Morpheus say?
No, it's all about choice.
It's all about free will.
And that's a recurring
theme in the film
is part of transcending the
duality or the determinism
of this reality is to
prove or to demonstrate
that we have free will.
>> That's right.
And the Merovingians,
in a way, they
were in control of the
country's free will for hundreds
and hundreds of years.
And a lot of odd things occurred
within France at that time,
from the Templars
to the Cathars.
And so I think
what we can see is
that it's possibly
the Merovingians are
behind the whole Templar
trip to Jerusalem
where they learned the
secrets of alchemy and money
and banking and all
these esoteric things
that they took back to Europe.
And I think that's what
they're trying to say here,
is that the very origins
of this secret society
started with the Merovingians.
>> And Neo is in a
way discovering this.
It's like we're on
the journey with Neo
discovering all this secret
society arcana and lore.
And next we're going to
see the Keymaster, which
is this weird
figure who pops up,
who's able to kind of, in a
way, do Solomonic magic, right?
He can open these
spiritual portals
and so forth in the
midst of the Matrix
>> And that's very
Freemasonic, too, by the way.
>> So the Keymaker brings
to mind the Key of Solomon,
which is this purported magical
text that King Solomon had
the ability to call forth demons
and make them do his bidding,
right?
They could construct the
temple at his bidding.
>> My name is Neo.
>> Yes, I'm the Keymaker.
I've been waiting for you.
>> They could also seemingly
appear out of nowhere.
You get the idea of portals
and so forth and dimensions.
And what is weird
is that when Neo
gets to this level
of his understanding
is where he's starting to
figure out that he can not just
stop bullets, but he has a much
wider control over the Matrix.
So it's almost like he's
becoming a better magician,
we almost might say, by
defeating these other magicians
like the Merovingians.
>> There is a church in the
south of France associated with
the Merovingians where a certain
father, Father [INAUDIBLE],,
may have possibly discovered an
underground tunnel system with
gold and Templar treasure.
And when you come
into his church,
there is a sign
above the church,
"this is a terrible
place" in French.
And then as you go
into the church,
there is a statue of Asmodeus.
Asmodeus was the guardian
of Solomon's temple.
And so this Solomonic
magic is very
replete within this whole
Merovingian Freemasonry
culture.
And there are key makers
within the Freemasonic rituals
that they're the ones that allow
you to pass through the door
to the next level of initiation.
So that's what's going
on here with Neo.
He's moving from one
level of initiation
to another through
these two sequels.
>> So the next scene we're
going to look at is the curious
architecture and symbology in
the of Merovingian's palace,
which I thought was significant
because it is a seven sided
star within a hexagram.
And this actually is
Crowley's star of Babalon.
A very quick sequence,
but on the floor
you could see three
people holding a ring.
So you have this trinitarian
aspect in the middle.
And then you have
the hexagonal star,
which is the hexagram, which
is also Solomonic magic.
That's the image that Solomon
used to control the demons.
And then on the outside of that
you have the seven sided star.
So all of those together
actually make up
Crowley's own personal
design of the star
of Babylon, of the
Babylon word game.
>> Six sided star is a hex and
that's what you put on people
when you're putting spells on
people, you put a hex on them.
Because what a hex does is it
fixes you in the cube of space.
Because there's six
sides to the cube.
Again, going back to
the monolith in "2001"
and a lot of other symbology
that we're talking about.
And then what happens is is
six is everything is fixed
and then seven is
the number of life.
And so you move from
this fixed place
to this enlivened place in
the sacred geometry of that,
and that's what Neo's doing.
He's moving from the
fixed to the supranatural.
>> There's also a scene that
we didn't see but if you notice
it, Monica Bellucci goes to the
wall and she takes a book off
to open up a secret passageway
which is where they met
the Keymaster.
And that book is Arthur
Schopenhauer's "World
as Will and Representation."
That's interesting
because that's
very close to Nietzscheism
because Schopenhauer
sees the world as just
kind of this willing,
this power of willing
that the one, Neo, right,
who's going to make his
way into this apotheosis,
that he must traverse
this long journey.
>> And that's very
Nietzschean, too.
>> Right.
>> So sure Schopenhauer had a
huge influence on Nietzsche.
>> Exactly.
For the next scene that
we're going to look at
is the introduction
of the Architect.
And this is where we get really
obviously overtly Masonic,
right?
>> Yes.
>> The great architect of the
universe who's this old bearded
white dude who they say was
supposed to be Sean Connery
as the Architect.
But it wasn't, he didn't want
to do this for whatever reason.
He probably thought this
was like some weird thing
he didn't want to do it.
But it would have made
sense because had it
been Sean Connery, he's actually
played that Masonic role before
in "The Man Who Would Be King."
>> He did.
Great film.
>> The first Matrix I designed
was quite naturally perfect.
It was a work of art,
flawless, sublime,
a triumph equaled only
by its monumental figure.
The inevitability of its
doom is apparent to me
now as a consequence
of the imperfection
inherent in every human being.
Thus I redesigned it
based on your history
to more accurately
reflect the varying
grotesqueries of your nature.
However, I was again
frustrated by failure.
>> So here we have the demiurge
who's created this Matrix.
>> Yeah, it's interesting
that they use a term that
the Freemasons use
for God, essentially,
the architect of the universe.
But he turns out to be the
false god, the demiurge,
who is in control of all of us.
And that's very interesting
and very mature,
actually, for a film
to be portraying this.
And you have to wonder
where the Wachowskis got
a lot of this
Gnostic information
because it wasn't that
available in the late 90s.
Gnosticism really
hasn't resurged
until after "The
Matrix" films came out.
>> I have since come to
understand that the answer
eluded me because it
required a lesser mind,
or perhaps a mind less bound by
the parameters of perfection.
thus the answer it was stumbled
upon by another, an intuitive
program initially created to
investigate certain aspects
of the human psyche.
If I am the father
of the Matrix,
she would undoubtedly
be its mother.
>> So what we just saw was the
Architect in this white suit,
right?
It's sort of the kids
idea of who God would be.
This old bearded guy
sitting there in a suit.
And what does he have?
A panopticism of
screens all around him
where he watches and
profiles and tries
to keep track of every
human being, right?
Something like the NSA
or something like that.
And it's faulty, right?
The Architect sits there
sort of pompous and tries
to explain the problem of Neo
and his free will and choice,
and how he can't stamp that out.
And it's really the Architect
that is the problem here,
right?
It's not humans,
it's not free will.
And he can't grasp the fact that
humans are not just flat facts,
that they actually have
creativity and individuality.
>> Yeah, again we go back
to the constant themes that
we're talking about here of
individualism and the attempt
by the powers that
be to snuff that out.
And the Architect is definitely
the bad guy in this film,
there's no doubt.
>> He's even set against
the feminine principle.
You know, he talks
about the Oracle
and they don't like each other,
you know, they're at odds.
And it's not until
the third installment
that they kind of reconcile and
they create this new utopia.
>> Right.
>> So "Matrix Reloaded" was
interesting in that it did take
us into other esoteric
territory that the first one
didn't investigate.
And they brought in
this Merovingian mythos
and this idea of
the Priory of Sion
and we've talked about the
bloodline that was missing.
And we didn't
really note the fact
that there's some sort
of vampirism involved
in the Merovingian, right?
There's vampires that
they're watching,
they're watching some vampire
movie, his henchmen are.
And there's something
very vampiric about him.
He's basically a
master of lust, right?
You said he's charismatic.
He's all about baser desires.
What Neo's learning
is that it's not
just that there's this Matrix,
it's that humans are also
controlled, like the guy
who sold everybody out
in the first "Matrix," he just
wanted a good steak, right?
Now it's about the
seven deadly sins,
let's be tempted with lust.
So it's about overcoming
all these temptations
and not being ruled
by baser desires.
And that's exactly with
Plato in "The Republic"
said would control the
masses, baser desires.
>> He's controlling us through
that and it's not working
anymore.
That's what he's
complaining about.
>> Yeah, he says it's
all causal determinism.
>> Yep.
>> So in the final installment,
we have the closure,
which is the machines
make their final move.
They're going to take
out Zion, they're
ready to completely
stamp out humanity.
We had that sermon
from Agent Smith
earlier on about how
humans are a disease,
you know, you stink, he
can't stand the foul smell.
Yeah, he's ready to
just stamp them out.
And they're almost
going to win, right?
They've almost got
rid of humanity.
And then Neo figures out that
the way to destroy the Matrix
is not to--
you can't take it out because
it's got these giant armaments,
right?
So what he does is that
he basically gives himself
to the Matrix, right?
He's going to have to
bait Agent Smith, that's
the only way to destroy it,
to become one with Smith.
Unbeknownst to Smith, right?
>> Yes.
They have to be surprised,
for sure, for this to work.
>> Right.
>> And it still seems a little
bit against the plot that Smith
wouldn't know this.
But that's OK.
>> Well, instead
of the Architect,
Neo realizes that he's going
to have to bypass the Architect
and go to the source,
as it's called,
which is basically the
central bot or whatever it is,
this grid.
>> Where the
archons are created.
>> Exactly, right.
So this is where Neo goes and
then he sort of makes a deal,
he bargains with them.
He says, look, your problem
is my problem and it's Smith.
Smith is going to
take you over and me.
He's going to stamp us both out.
Why don't we work together,
we'll get rid of agent Smith.
>> Yep.
>> Goodbye Agent Smith.
>> Imagine the entire
world, or the Matrix world,
coming under the sway of Smith.
It is as if the CIA has
completely brain controlled,
mind controlled
the entire world.
Everybody's become a Smith,
they're all clones of Smith,
and there's no way out of this.
And so Neo realizes
that the only way is
to bait Agent Smith
into coming into him,
right, this union, and
then that destroys Smith.
>> And the pose at the
end, the Christ-like pose,
he's the Christos who has come
to assist Sophia in organizing
the chaotic reality that she's
created and the Matrix is this
attempt to control nature, but
eventually natural forces will
always win out.
And Agent Smith is destroyed.
And I would point
out again that all
of the creations of the
Matrix all look the same.
>> Exactly.
>> They can't come up
with anything original.
Because the demiurge
has no originality.
The demiurge is jealous of us
because we have creativity.
And for that, that is
one of the main reasons
that he is suppressing us
is because of our own innate
creativity and Neo
uses that against him
and defeats the Matrix.
>> Well that's what never
had been done by the previous
incarnations of Neo-- and
we learned that Neo is one
of a long line of Neos
that have come and failed--
is that none of them
figured out that they
could give them self up, right?
So there was this choice
of self-sacrifice.
So free will wins
out in the end,
precisely because they agreed
to give themselves up and die.
>> Which, in a way, is what
we all have to do, in a way.
So to fight against
the powers that be,
we have to accept that our
death may be the result of that.
>> And what's weird about the
movie is the final scene has
the Architect and the
Oracle, the Sophia principal,
sitting down on a
park bench, you know,
just kind of chumming it up.
And they've created
this rainbow utopia.
So it's like Neo had to die
so that they could create
another version of the Matrix,
which is just like Happy Land
Barney or something.
>> Yeah, and again, you go back
to the origins of Christianity
and you have this kind of
Pollyannnish kind of philosophy
being spread around Europe
about how love your neighbor,
what does that really mean?
And so Christianity
was trying to adopt
the philosophy of the Gnostics
in order to spread itself.
But in the end, it was an
anti-Gnostic philosophy.
So it's still interesting
that the Matrix is still
going at the end of the movie.
>> So what we saw was
Neo basically approaching
the source of the
Matrix, this giant robot,
and making that deal with him to
destroy the rebel program Agent
Smith.
And the only way
that can be done
is that Neo gives his life up.
And so you see him in
that cruciform pose,
which is his self-sacrifice.
Again, the other
Neos all failed.
He wins, he achieves success
because of his free will choice
to sacrifice himself.
And so it's a re-presentation
of the Christ myth.
>> Yeah, and in Gnostic
mythology, of course,
light solidifies down onto
the Earth and becomes form.
So we were originally light,
but we became form, humans
or animals or plants.
And in this movie, it's
the exact opposite.
>> It's the deification of Neo.
>> That's right.
He's taking form and
turning it back into light.
He's returning back
to the source, which
is what all the entire
Gnostic goal is,
is to return back to the light.
>> It is done.
>> In my view, the take away
from "The Matrix" is that,
on many layers and levels,
we are in a matrix.
Just that simple.
I mean, in one sense, we live in
Plato's "Allegory of the Cave"
because Plato was talking
about an oppressive state,
right, that keeps
its citizens down
and tries to keep them
drugged and stupid
and it controls him
through base desires,
like we saw in
"Matrix Reloaded."
And we have to exit
that cave that we're in.
And that's the essence
of this whole trilogy
is exiting that
cave, they can only
come through true
philosophy, ultimately.
I mean, the true
philosopher, Socrates,
is the guy who's willing
to stop being transfixed
by the phantasms on the
cave wall, exit the cave,
and then come back and try to
tell people about it but you
can't do it unless you--
as Morpheus says, you have to
see the Matrix for yourself.
You can't just tell people.
You have to exit for yourself.
>> You do.
And I'll point out that
Socrates gave his life for that.
>> Exactly.
>> Just like Neo did.
>> Right.
>> And yeah, I agree with that.
And it's really
all of our journey
to try to break free of
this matrix, all the way
from what you've been
taught in school to what
your parents and your religions
were trying to teach you.
You've been trapped in a
matrix your whole entire life.
Even when you think you're
liberated from the matrix,
you're still living
out the programming
that the matrix left
embedded in you.
And we live in a matrix
and we need to all break
free of the matrix.
>> Join us again next time
on "Hollywood Decoded,"
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weider.
And thanks for watching.
[MUSIC PLAYING]